<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
			<p>Young Vorontsóv was much pleased that it was he, and no one else, who had succeeded in winning over and receiving Hadji Murád⁠—next to Shamil Russia’s chief and most active enemy. There was only one unpleasant thing about it: General Meller-Zakomélsky was in command of the army at Vozdvízhenski, and the whole affair ought to have been carried out through him; and as Vorontsóv had done everything himself without reporting it, there might be some unpleasantness; and this thought somewhat interfered with his satisfaction. On reaching his house he entrusted Hadji Murád’s henchmen to the regimental adjutant, and himself showed Hadji Murád into the house.</p>
			<p>Princess Márya Vasílevna, elegantly dressed and smiling, and her little son, a handsome curly-headed, six-year-old boy, met Hadji Murád in the drawing room. The latter placed his hands on his heart, and through the interpreter⁠—who had entered with him⁠—said with solemnity that he regarded himself as the Prince’s <i xml:lang="tt">kunák</i>, since the Prince had brought him into his own house; and that a <i xml:lang="tt">kunák</i>’s whole family was as sacred as the <i xml:lang="tt">kunák</i> himself.</p>
			<p>Hadji Murád’s appearance and manners pleased Márya Vasílevna; and the fact that he flushed when she held out her large white hand to him, inclined her still more in his favor. She invited him to sit down; and having asked him whether he drank coffee, had some served. He, however, declined it when it came. He understood a little Russian, but could not speak it. When something was said which he could not understand he smiled, and his smile pleased Márya Vasílevna, just as it had pleased Poltorátsky. The curly-headed, keen-eyed little boy (whom his mother called Búlka) standing beside her did not take his eyes off Hadji Murád, whom he had always heard spoken of as a great warrior.</p>
			<p>Leaving Hadji Murád with his wife, Vorontsóv went to his office to do what was necessary about reporting the fact of Hadji Murád’s having come over to the Russians. When he had written a report to the general in command of the left flank⁠—General Kozlóvsky⁠—at Grózny, and a letter to his father, Vorontsóv hurried home, afraid that his wife might be vexed with him for forcing on her this terrible stranger, who had to be treated in such a way that he should not take offense, and yet not too kindly. But his fears were needless. Hadji Murád was sitting in an armchair with little Búlka, Vorontsóv’s stepson, on his knee; and with bent head was listening attentively to the interpreter, who was translating to him the words of the laughing Márya Vasílevna. Márya Vasílevna was telling him that if every time a <i xml:lang="tt">kunák</i> admired anything of his he made him a present of it, he would soon have to go about like Adam.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>When the Prince entered, Hadji Murád rose at once and, surprising and offending Búlka by putting him off his knee, changed the playful expression of his face to a stern and serious one; and he only sat down again when Vorontsóv had himself taken a seat.</p>
			<p>Continuing the conversation, he answered Márya Vasílevna by telling her that it was a law among his people that anything your <i xml:lang="tt">kunák</i> admired must be presented to him.</p>
			<p>“Thy son, <i xml:lang="tt">kunák</i>!” he said in Russian, patting the curly head of the boy, who had again climbed on his knee.</p>
			<p>“He is delightful, your brigand!” said Márya Vasílevna, to her husband in French. “Búlka has been admiring his dagger, and he has given it to him.”</p>
			<p>Búlka showed the dagger to his father. “<i xml:lang="fr">C’est un objet de prix!</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> added she.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Il faudra trouver l’occasion de lui faire cadeau</i>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> said Vorontsóv.</p>
			<p>Hadji Murád, his eyes turned down, sat stroking the boy’s curly hair and saying: “<i xml:lang="tt">Dzhigit, dzhigit!</i>”</p>
			<p>“A beautiful, beautiful dagger,” said Vorontsóv, half drawing out the sharpened blade, which had a ridge down the center. “I thank thee!”</p>
			<p>“Ask him what I can do for him,” he said to the interpreter.</p>
			<p>The interpreter translated, and Hadji Murád at once replied that he wanted nothing, but that he begged to be taken to a place where he could say his prayers.</p>
			<p>Vorontsóv called his valet, and told him to do what Hadji Murád desired.</p>
			<p>As soon as Hadji Murád was alone in the room allotted to him his face altered. The pleased expression, now kindly and now stately, vanished, and a look of anxiety showed itself. Vorontsóv had received him far better than Hadji Murád had expected. But the better the reception the less did Hadji Murád trust Vorontsóv and his officers. He feared everything: that he might be seized, chained, and sent to Siberia, or simply killed; and therefore he was on his guard. He asked Eldár, when the latter entered his room, where his <i xml:lang="tt">murids</i> had been put, and whether their arms had been taken from them, and where the horses were. Eldár reported that the horses were in the Prince’s stables; that the men had been placed in a barn; that they retained their arms, and that the interpreter was giving them food and tea.</p>
			<p>Hadji Murád shook his head in doubt, and after undressing said his prayers, and told Eldár to bring him his silver dagger. He then dressed, and, having fastened his belt, sat down with his legs on the divan to await what might befall him.</p>
			<p>At four in the afternoon the interpreter came to call him to dine with the Prince.</p>
			<p>At dinner he hardly ate anything except some <i xml:lang="tt">pilau</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> to which he helped himself from the very part of the dish from which Márya Vasílevna had helped herself.</p>
			<p>“He is afraid we shall poison him,” Márya Vasílevna remarked to her husband. “He has helped himself from the place where I took my helping.” Then, instantly turning to Hadji Murád, she asked him through the interpreter when he would pray again. Hadji Murád lifted five fingers and pointed to the sun. “Then it will soon be time,” and Vorontsóv drew out his watch and pressed a spring. The watch struck four and one quarter. This evidently surprised Hadji Murád, and he asked to hear it again, and to be allowed to look at the watch.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Voilà l’occasion! Donnez-lui la montre</i>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> said the Princess to her husband.</p>
			<p>Vorontsóv at once offered the watch to Hadji Murád.</p>
			<p>The latter placed his hand on his breast and took the watch. Several times he touched the spring, listened, and nodded his head approvingly.</p>
			<p>After dinner, Meller-Zakomélsky’s aide-de-camp was announced.</p>
			<p>The aide-de-camp informed the Prince that the General, having heard of Hadji Murád’s arrival, was highly displeased that this had not been reported to him, and required Hadji Murád to be brought to him without delay. Vorontsóv replied that the General’s command should be obeyed, and through the interpreter informed Hadji Murád of these orders, and asked him to go to Meller with him.</p>
			<p>When Márya Vasílevna heard what the aide-de-camp had come about, she at once understood that unpleasantness might arise between her husband and the General, and decided, in spite of all her husband’s attempts to dissuade her, to go with him and Hadji Murád.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Vous feriez blen mieux de rester⁠—c’est mon affaire, non pas la vôtre.⁠ ⁠…</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Vous ne pouvez pas m’empêcher d’aller voir madame la générale!</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></p>
			<p>“You could go some other time.”</p>
			<p>“But I wish to go now!”</p>
			<p>There was no help for it, so Vorontsóv agreed; and they all three went.</p>
			<p>When they entered, Meller with somber politeness conducted Márya Vasílevna to his wife, and told his aide-de-camp to show Hadji Murád to the waiting room, and not let him out till further orders.</p>
			<p>“Please⁠ ⁠…” he said to Vorontsóv, opening the door of his study and letting the Prince enter before him.</p>
			<p>Having entered the study, he stopped in front of the Prince and said, without offering him a seat:</p>
			<p>“I am in command here and therefore all negotiations with the enemy have to be carried on through me! Why did you not report to me the fact of Hadji Murád’s having come over?”</p>
			<p>“An emissary came to me and announced Hadji Murád’s wish to capitulate only to me,” replied Vorontsóv, growing pale with excitement, expecting some rude expression from the angry General and at the same time becoming infected with his anger.</p>
			<p>“I ask you why was I not informed!”</p>
			<p>“I intended to inform you, Baron, but⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“You are not to address me as ‘Baron,’ but as ‘Your Excellency’!” And here the Baron’s pent-up irritation suddenly broke out, and he uttered all that had long been boiling in his soul.</p>
			<p>“I have not served my sovereign twenty-seven years in order that men who began their service yesterday, relying on family connections, should give orders under my very nose about matters that do not concern them!”</p>
			<p>“Your Excellency, I request you not to say things that are incorrect!” interrupted Vorontsóv.</p>
			<p>“I am saying what is correct, and I won’t allow⁠ ⁠…” said the General, still more irritably.</p>
			<p>But at that moment Márya Vasílevna entered, rustling with her skirts, and followed by a modest-looking little lady, Meller-Zakomélsky’s wife.</p>
			<p>“Come, come, Baron! Simon did not wish to displease you,” began Márya Vasílevna.</p>
			<p>“I am not speaking about that, Princess.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Well, well, let’s forget it all!⁠ ⁠… You know, ‘A bad peace is better than a good quarrel!’⁠ ⁠… Oh dear, what am I saying?” and she laughed.</p>
			<p>The angry General capitulated to the enchanting laugh of the beauty. A smile hovered under his moustache.</p>
			<p>“I confess I was wrong,” said Vorontsóv, “but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well, and I too got rather carried away,” said Meller, and held out his hand to the Prince.</p>
			<p>Peace was reestablished, and it was decided to leave Hadji Murád for the present at Meller’s, and then to send him to the commander of the left flank.</p>
			<p>Hadji Murád sat in the next room and though he did not understand what was said, he understood what it was necessary for him to understand⁠—namely, that they were quarrelling about him, that his desertion of Shamil was a matter of immense importance to the Russians, and that therefore not only would they not exile or kill him, but that he would be able to demand much from them. He also understood that though Meller-Zakomélsky was the commanding officer, he had not as much influence as his subordinate Vorontsóv; and that Vorontsóv was important and Meller-Zakomélsky unimportant; and therefore, when Meller-Zakomélsky sent for him and began to question him, Hadji Murád bore himself proudly and ceremoniously, saying that he had come from the mountains to serve the White Tsar, and would give account only to his Sirdar, meaning the commander-in-chief, Prince Vorontsóv, in Tiflis.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
