<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
			<p>Life in our advanced forts in the Chechen lines went on as usual. Since the events last narrated there had been two alarms when the companies were called out, and militiamen galloped about; but both times the mountaineers who had caused the excitement got away; and once at VozdvГӯzhensk they killed a Cossack, and succeeded in carrying off eight Cossack horses that were being watered. There had been no further raids since the one in which the <i xml:lang="tt">aoul</i> was destroyed; but an expedition on a large scale was expected in consequence of the appointment of a new commander of the left flank, Prince BaryГЎtinsky. He was an old friend of the ViceroyвҖҷs, and had been in command of the KabardГЎ Regiment. On his arrival at GrГіzny as commander of the whole Left Flank, he at once mustered a detachment to continue to carry out the TsarвҖҷs commands as communicated by ChernyshГіv to VorontsГіv. The detachment mustered at VozdvГӯzhensk left the fort and took up a position towards KurГӯn. The troops were encamped there, and were felling the forest. Young VorontsГіv lived in a splendid cloth tent, and his wife, MГЎrya VasГӯlevna, often came to the camp and stayed the night. BaryГЎtinskyвҖҷs relations with MГЎrya VasГӯlevna were no secret to anyone, and the officers who were not in the aristocratic set, and the soldiers, abused her in coarse termsвҒ вҖ”for her presence in camp caused them to be told off to lie in ambush at night. The mountaineers were in the habit of bringing guns with range and firing shells at the camp. The shells generally missed their aim, and therefore at ordinary times no special measures were taken to prevent such firing; but now, men were placed in ambush to hinder the mountaineers from injuring or frightening MГЎrya VasГӯlevna with their cannon. To have to be always lying in ambush at night to save a lady from being frightened, offended and annoyed them; and therefore the soldiers, as well as the officers not admitted to the higher society, called MГЎrya VasГӯlevna bad names.</p>
			<p>Butler, having obtained leave of absence from his fort, came to the camp to visit some old messmates from the cadet corps and fellow officers of the KurГӯn regiment, who were serving as adjutants and orderly officers. When he first arrived he had a very good time. He put up in PoltorГЎtskyвҖҷs tent, and there met many acquaintances who gave him a hearty welcome. He also called on VorontsГіv, whom he knew slightly, having once served in the same regiment with him. VorontsГіv received him very kindly, introduced him to Prince BaryГЎtinsky, and invited him to the farewell dinner he was giving in honor of General KozlГіvsky, who until BaryГЎtinskyвҖҷs arrival had been in command of the left flank.</p>
			<p>The dinner was magnificent. Special tents were erected in a line, and along the whole length of them a table was spread as for a dinner-party, with dinner services and bottles. Everything recalled life in the guards in Petersburg. Dinner was served at two oвҖҷclock. In the middle on one side sat KozlГіvsky; on the other, BaryГЎtinsky. At KozlГіvskyвҖҷs right and left hand sat the VorontsГіvs, husband and wife. All along the table on both sides sat the officers of the KabardГЎ and KurГӯn regiments. Butler sat next to PoltorГЎtsky and they both chatted merrily and drank with the officers around them. When the roast was served and the orderlies had gone round and filled the champagne glasses, PoltorГЎtsky, with real anxiety, said to Butler:</p>
			<p>вҖңOur KozlГіvsky will disgrace himself!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhy?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhy, heвҖҷll have to make a speech, and what good is he at that?вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ ItвҖҷs not as easy as capturing entrenchments under fire! And with a lady beside him, too, and these aristocrats!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңReally itвҖҷs painful to look at him,вҖқ said the officers to one another. And now the solemn moment had arrived. BaryГЎtinsky rose and lifting his glass addressed a short speech to KozlГіvsky. When he had finished, KozlГіvskyвҒ вҖ”who always had a trick of using the word вҖңhowвҖқ superfluouslyвҒ вҖ”rose and stammeringly began:</p>
			<p>вҖңIn compliance with the august will of his Majesty, I am leaving youвҒ вҖ”parting from you, gentlemen,вҖқ said he. вҖңBut consider me as always remaining among you. The truth of the proverb, how вҖҳOne man in the field is no warrior,вҖҷ is well known to you, gentlemen.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Therefore, how every reward I have receivedвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ how all the benefits showered on me by the great generosity of our sovereign the EmperorвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ how all my positionвҒ вҖ”how my good nameвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ how everything decidedlyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ howвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ (here his voice trembled) вҖңвҖҰВ how I am indebted to you for it, to you alone, my friends!вҖқ The wrinkled face puckered up still more, he gave a sob, and tears came into his eyes. вҖңHow from my heart I offer you my sincerest, heartfelt gratitude!вҖқ</p>
			<p>KozlГіvsky could not go on, but turned round and began to embrace the officers. The Princess hid her face in her handkerchief. The Prince blinked, with his mouth drawn awry. Many of the officersвҖҷ eyes grew moist and Butler, who had hardly known KozlГіvsky, could also not restrain his tears. He liked all this very much.</p>
			<p>Then followed other toasts. BaryГЎtinsky, VorontsГіv, the officers, and the soldiersвҖҷ healths were drunk, and the visitors left the table intoxicated with wine and with the military elation to which they were always so prone. The weather was wonderful, sunny and calm, and the air fresh and bracing. On all sides bonfires crackled and songs resounded. It might have been thought that everybody was celebrating some joyful event. Butler went to PoltorГЎtskyвҖҷs in the happiest, most emotional mood. Several officers had gathered there, and a card table was set. An adjutant started a bank with a hundred rubles. Two or three times Butler left the tent with his hand gripping the purse in his trousers-pocket; but at last he could resist the temptation no longer, and despite the promise he had given to his brother and to himself not to play, he began to bet. Before an hour was past, very red, perspiring, and soiled with chalk, he was sitting with both elbows on the table and writing on itвҒ вҖ”under cards bent for вҖңcornersвҖқ and вҖңtransportsвҖқ<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a>вҒ вҖ”the figures of his stakes. He had already lost so much that he was afraid to count up what was scored against him. But he knew without counting that all the pay he could draw in advance, added to the value of his horse, would not suffice to pay what the adjutant, a stranger to him, had written down against him. He would still have gone on playing, but the adjutant sternly laid down the cards he held in his large clean hands, and added up the chalked figures of the score of ButlerвҖҷs losses. Butler, confused, began to make excuses for being unable to pay the whole of his debt at once; and said he would send it from home. When he said this he noticed that everybody pitied him, and that they allвҒ вҖ”even PoltorГЎtskyвҒ вҖ”avoided meeting his eye. That was his last evening there. He need only have refrained from playing, and gone to the VorontsГіvs who had invited him, and all would have been well, thought he; but now it was not only not well, but terrible.</p>
			<p>Having taken leave of his comrades and acquaintances he rode home and went to bed, and slept for eighteen hours as people usually sleep after losing heavily. From the fact that he asked her to lend him fifty kopeks to tip the Cossack who had escorted him, and from his sorrowful looks and short answers, MГЎrya DmГӯtrievna guessed that he had lost at cards, and she reproached the Major for having given him leave of absence.</p>
			<p>When he woke up at noon next day and remembered the situation he was in, he longed again to plunge into the oblivion from which he had just emerged; but it was impossible. Steps had to be taken to repay the four hundred and seventy rubles he owed to the stranger. The first step he took was to write to his brother, confessing his sin and imploring him, for the last time, to lend him five hundred rubles on the security of the mill that they still owned in common. Then he wrote to a stingy relative, asking her to lend him five hundred rubles at whatever rate of interest she liked. Finally he went to the Major, knowing that heвҒ вҖ”or rather MГЎrya DmГӯtrievnaвҒ вҖ”had some money, and asked him to lend him five hundred rubles.</p>
			<p>вҖңIвҖҷd let you have them at once,вҖқ said the Major, вҖңbut MГЎsha wonвҖҷt! These women are so closefistedвҒ вҖ”who the devil can understand them?вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ And yet you must get out of it somehow, devil take him!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ HasnвҖҷt that brute the canteen-keeper got something?вҖқ</p>
			<p>But it was no use trying to borrow from the canteen-keeper; so ButlerвҖҷs salvation could only come from his brother or his stingy relative.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
