<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Preface</h2>
			<p>“I am writing to you specially to say how glad I have been to be your contemporary, and to express my last and sincere request. My friend, return to literary activity! That gift came to you from whence comes all the rest.⁠ ⁠… Great writer of our Russian land, listen to my wish!”</p>
			<p>So wrote Turgenev on his deathbed to Tolstoy, when the latter, absorbed in religious struggles and studies, had for five years produced no work of art save one short story.</p>
			<p>Nor was it long before the wish was realised, for three years later Tolstoy was writing <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Death of Iván Ilyitch</i>, and that tremendous drama, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Power of Darkness</i>; and these were followed by a number of short stories, some plays, a long novel (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Resurrection</i>) and the works now posthumously published. Among these latter a foremost place belongs to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hadji Murád</i>, in which Tolstoy again tells of that Caucasian life which supplied him with the matter for some of his earliest tales as well as for his great story <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Cossacks</i>, which Turgenev declared to be “the best story that has been written in our (Russian) language.”</p>
			<p>The Caucasus indeed offered a rich variety of material on which Tolstoy drew at every stage of his literary career. It was there that, at the age of twenty-three, he first saw war as a volunteer; there he served for two years as a cadet; and there finally he became an officer, before leaving to serve in the Crimean war⁠—which in its turn gave him material for his sketches of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sevastopol</i>.</p>
			<p>In his letters from the Caucasus he often complained of the dullness and emptiness of his life there; yet it certainly attracted him for a while, and was not devoid of stirring and curious incidents.</p>
			<p>The most extraordinary of these relates to a gambling debt he incurred and was unable to pay. Having given notes-of-hand, he was in despair when the date of payment approached without his having been able to procure the money needed, and he prayed earnestly to God “to get me out of this disagreeable scrape.”</p>
			<p>The very next morning he received a letter enclosing his notes-of-hand, which were returned to him as a free gift by a young Chechen named Sado, who had become his <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">kunák</i> (devoted friend) and had won them back at cards from the officer who won them from Tolstoy.</p>
			<p>It was in company with that same Sado that Tolstoy, when passing from one fort to another, was chased by the enemy and nearly captured.</p>
			<p>His life was in imminent danger on another occasion, when a shell, fired by the enemy, smashed the carriage of a cannon he was pointing; but once again he escaped unhurt.</p>
			<p>It was during his first year in the Caucasus that Tolstoy began writing for publication. “The Raid,” describing the kind of warfare he was witnessing there, was the second of his stories to appear in print. A little later he wrote two other tales dealing with the same subject: “The Wood-Felling,” and “Meeting a Moscow Acquaintance in the Detachment.”</p>
			<p>Feeling that he had not exhausted the material at his disposal, he then planned “The Cossacks: a Caucasian Story of 1852,” which he kept on hand unfinished for nearly ten years, and might not have published even then had he not happened to lose some money at Chinese billiards to a stranger he met at the club in Moscow. To pay this debt, he sold “The Cossacks” for <abbr>Rs.</abbr> 1,000 (about £150 in those days) to Katkóv, the well-known publicist and publisher, with whom he subsequently quarrelled. The circumstances under which he had parted with “The Cossacks” were so unpleasant to Tolstoy that he never completed the story.</p>
			<p>Ten years later, when he had set his heart on producing an attractive reading-book for children, he wrote the charming little story “A Prisoner in the Caucasus” (one of the gems in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Twenty-three Tales</i>), founded on the above-mentioned incident of his own narrow escape from capture; and finally, after another thirty years had passed, he drew upon his Caucasian recollections for the last time when he composed <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hadji Murád</i>.</p>
			<p>Tolstoy had met Hadji Murád in Tiflis in December 1851,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and in a letter addressed to his brother Sergius on the 23rd of that month he wrote⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“If you wish to show off with news from the Caucasus, you may recount that a certain Hadji Murád (second in importance to Shamil himself) surrendered a few days ago to the Russian Government. He was the leading daredevil and ‘brave’ of all Chechnya, but has been led into committing a mean action.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The details of Hadji Murád’s life as given by Tolstoy in his story are not always historically exact; but the main events are true, and the tale is told in a way that gives a vivid and faithful picture of those stirring times.</p>
			<p>Of the struggle for independence carried on in the Caucasus with such desperate bravery for so many years, very little was known to English readers until the publication of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Baddeley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Russian Conquest of the Caucasus</i>, which gives an excellent account of that involved, confusing and long drawn-out, but important, contest.</p>
			<p>The Caucasus is peopled by so many tribes, differing so much among themselves, and all so strange to Western Europeans, that it is not easy to summarise the history of the conflict in a way at once correct and clear. There are, however, certain main facts which should be borne in mind when reading <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hadji Murád</i>.</p>
			<p>As her only possible way of escape from the oppression of Persia on one side and of Turkey on another, Christian Georgia⁠—lying to the south of the Caucasian Mountains⁠—submitted to Russia as long ago as the commencement of the nineteenth century.</p>
			<p>Even before that Russia had spasmodically attempted to conquer the northern part of the Caucasus; but from then onwards she had a special incentive to press forward and annex the territories dividing her from Georgia which was already hers.</p>
			<p>The internecine feuds of the native tribes generally prevented them from offering a united resistance to Russian aggression; but the dense forests of Chechnya, and the exceedingly mountainous character of Daghestan, rendered the subjugation of those regions a matter of great difficulty.</p>
			<p>In addition to the geographical obstacles there was another, due to a strong religious revival which sprang up among the Mohammedan population and, despite the feuds among the tribes, to a considerable extent and for a considerable time united them in a holy war against the infidel Russians.</p>
			<p>Like all great religious movements this revival had roots in a distant past. It also had currents, religious and political, which swept now in one direction and now in another.</p>
			<p>To begin with, there was a <i xml:lang="tt">Murid</i> movement which appears to have been almost identical with Sufi’ism, and to have existed from the third century of the Mohammedan era. That movement, going beyond the Shariát (the written law), inculcated the Tarikát (the Path) leading to the higher life. It also proclaimed the equality of all Mussulmans, rich and poor alike, and enjoined temperance, abstinence, self-denial, and the renunciation of the good things of both worlds, that man may make himself “free to receive worthily the love towards God.” In Muridism a teacher was called a <i xml:lang="tt">Murshíd</i> (“one who shows” the way), while a <i xml:lang="tt">Murid</i> was a disciple or follower (“one who desires” to find the way).</p>
			<p>Such was Muridism for several centuries: a peaceful, religious movement of a highly spiritual character; but within the last few generations the struggle against Russia had given a new quality to the movement, and from being spiritual it had become strongly political.</p>
			<p>As early as 1785 Mansúr, a leader of unknown origin, appeared in the Caucasus preaching the <i xml:lang="tt">Ghazavát</i>, or Holy War, against the infidels; and from 1830 onwards, when Kazi-Mullá, the first Imam (uniting in himself supreme spiritual and temporal power) took the field, Muridism became identified with the fierce struggle for independence carried on by the native tribes against the Russian invaders.</p>
			<p>Mansúr and Kazi-Mullá are both mentioned in Tolstoy’s story, in which also Hadji Murád tells of the part he took in the execution or assassination of Kazi-Mullá’s successor, Hamzád. Shamil, too, who succeeded Hamzád and was the greatest of the Imams, figures as one of the principal characters in the story.</p>
			<p>How little the nature and importance of that war in the Caucasus was understood by Western Europe is shown by the fact that when the Crimean War broke out⁠—the year after Hadji Murád’s death⁠—no serious attempt was made to support or encourage Shamil in the struggle which, even after the conclusion of the Crimean War, he desperately maintained against Russia till his last fortress fell in 1859, and he himself was sent prisoner to Kaluga.</p>
			<p>We may be said to owe the existence of this story to the severe illnesses from which Tolstoy suffered in 1901 and 1902, for his sickness kept him in a state in which he found it difficult to work at “What is Religion?” or the other didactic essays he was engaged upon, and by way of relaxation he turned to fiction and produced <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hadji Murád</i>. It is worth noticing that in the fifth chapter of this⁠—one of the last stories he ever wrote⁠—Tolstoy describes a skirmish and a soldier’s death in a way that closely reminds one of an incident he had handled in “The Wood Felling,” nearly half a century before. He thus, at the outset and at the close of his literary career, told almost the same tale in almost the same way and with almost the same feeling.</p>
			<p>On comparing the Caucasian stories he wrote between the ages of twenty-three and thirty-four with the one he wrote when he was seventy-four, one finds in them all the same wonderfully acute power of observation which seized the characteristic indications both of the inner and the outer life of man; the same retentive memory; the same keen interest in life, and the same discrimination between things sympathised with and things disapproved of, but there is this very noticeable difference: each of the earlier stories contains a character who more or less closely represents Tolstoy himself, through whose eyes everything is seen. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hadji Murád</i>, on the contrary, is written quite objectively. Before he wrote it Tolstoy had become sure of himself, and felt that he had only to tell the story, and that his judgment of men and of actions would justify itself without his own point of view even needing to be explicitly stated.</p>
			<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hadji Murád</i>, as in all his later writings, Tolstoy makes us feel how repugnant to him were the customary ways of the life we call “civilised,” with its selfishness and self-indulgence, its officialism, banquets, balls, and masquerades, and above all, with its complete lack of spiritual fervour. The manners and customs of the semi-savage tribesmen arouse no such abhorrence in him. The natural instinctive spontaneity of their conduct appeals to him; and throughout the tale he makes us feel that Hadji Murád could not possibly have acted otherwise than as he did, either when he deserted the Russians or when he returned to them, or when he slew his guards and tried once more to escape to the mountains. Hadji Murád held life cheap⁠—his own as well as that of other people; but though he spilt much blood, he never arouses the antipathy we are made to feel for the pedantic, stupid cruelty of Nicholas <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.</p>
			<p>Especially attractive to Tolstoy is the religious fervour of self-abnegation, and the readiness for self-sacrifice in a great cause, which were so frequently shown by the mountaineers.</p>
			<p>We are more closely akin to the men of other lands than we often realise; and lest someone reading this book should say to himself, “Yes, the Russians are so-and-so, but we are not as they⁠ ⁠…” it may be well to mention that the elder Vorontsóv’s mother was an Englishwoman, a Herbert of the Pembroke family. For that fact, and for much else, I am indebted to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">J. F.</abbr> Baddeley, and especially for his version of the song of the blood-feud sung by Khanéfii, which I have borrowed.</p>
			<p>The footnotes are not part of the original work, but belong to the translation.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Aylmer Maude.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
